Kjf/sqd getting started (#2148)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/guides/qiskit-addons-sqd.mdx

---
title: Sample-based quantum diagonalization
description: Overview of the Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) workflow
---

# Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD)

> Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) is a technique for finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors of quantum operators, such as the Hamiltonian of a quantum system, using quantum and distributed classical computing together.

Reviewer: Is there somewhere in this intro that we could add something about why a user might want to use this? the intro does a good job of explaining _what_ the technique is, but not very much about _why_ it might be beneficial for a user

The SQD tool can target Hamiltonians expressed as linear combinations of Pauli operators, or second-quantized fermionic operators. The input samples are obtained by quantum circuits defined by the user, which are believed to be good representations of eigenstates (for example the ground state) of a target operator. The convergence rate of SQD as a function of the number of samples improves with the sparseness of the target eigenstate.

## Install SQD package

There are two ways to install the SQD package. Via PyPI and building from source. We also recommend installing these packages in a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3.10/tutorial/venv.html) to ensure separation between package dependencies.

### Install from PyPI

The most straightforward way to install the `qiskit-addon-sqd` package is via PyPI.

```bash
pip install qiskit-addon-sqd
```

> ### Build from source

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we should put the build from source section inside a twisty? I think it's only relevant for a small subset of users

Users who wish to contribute to this package or who want to install it manually may do so by first cloning the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-sqd.git
```

and install the package via `pip`. The repository also contains example notebooks which can be run and if you plan on developing in the repository, you may want to also install the `dev` dependencies.

Adjust the options to suit your needs.

```bash
pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies, dev]'
```

## Theoretical background

> The SQD workflow using self-consistent configuration recovery is explained in detail in [[1]](#references). This page will briefly overview the technique depicted in the following diagram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SQD workflow using self-consistent configuration recovery is explained in detail in [[1]](#references). This section will briefly overview the technique depicted in the following diagram.
```

![SQD diagram depicting configuration recovery, collecting subsamples, and obtaining eigenstates from those subsamples](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/sqd_diagram.png)

> Here $\bar{\mathcal{X}}$ is a set of noisy samples containing, in the context of the Hamiltonian being simulated, physical and non-physical configurations (represented as bitstrings) obtained from execution on a QPU. The non-physical configurations are due to noise and can be processed by the `sqd.configuration_recovery.recover_configurations()` method to refine the samples into a new set $\mathcal{X}_R$. 

Reviewer: I think it would be good to emphasise somewhere in this section that the noisy samples come from a hardware run, and every step in the diagram after that is purely classical

Author: > also i know the api ref isn't ready yet but if we're going to mention the `recover_configurations()` function by name we should probably link to some more info about how to use the code

Yeah I was planning on adding a link in once the API docs have been migrated.

> I think it would be good to emphasize somewhere in this section that the noisy samples come from a hardware run, and every step in the diagram after that is purely classical

I'll add a point in here about these samples come from a QPU.

From this set, batches of configurations $\mathcal{S}^{(1)}...\ \mathcal{S}^{(K)}$ are collected and represent samples obtained from different subspaces of the Hamiltonian. These subspace samples are built from a set of basis states, $\mathcal{S}^{(k)}=\{|\mathbf{x}^{(k)}\rangle\}$, and are projections of the system Hamiltonian, $\hat{H}$. This projection is defined as

$$ \hat{H}_{S^{(k)}} = \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\hat{H}\hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\text{, with } \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}} = \sum_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathcal{S}^{(k)}} |\mathbf{x}\rangle\langle\mathbf{x}|$$

where $\hat{H}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}$ is the Hamiltonian of a given subspace.

> The bulk of the SQD workflow lies here where each of these subspace Hamiltonians are diagonalized. The ground states obtained from each of these subspaces, $|\psi^{(k)}\rangle$, and are used to obtain an estimate of a reference vector of occupancies $\mathbf{n}^{(K)}$ averaged over each of the $K$ subspaces and sent back to the configuration recovery step. Then a new set of subspaces are obtained and diagonalized, and this procedure iterates in a self-consistent loop until the ground state energy estimate has converged.

Reviewer: "and are used..." seems like a typo?

## References

> [1] Robledo-Moreno, Javier, et al. ["Chemistry beyond exact solutions on a quantum-centric supercomputer"](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.05068) arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05068 (2024).

Reviewer: This page is missing a next steps section

---
title: Sample-based quantum diagonalization
description: Overview of the Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) workflow
---

> # Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) overview
```
changing to match the toc

Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) is a technique for finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors of quantum operators, such as the Hamiltonian of a quantum system, using quantum and distributed classical computing together. This post-processing technique may be especially useful for users simulating chemical or other quantum systems.

Classical computing is used to process samples obtained from a quantum processor, and to project and diagonalize a target Hamiltonian in a subspace spanned by them. This allows SQD to be robust to samples corrupted by quantum noise and manage large Hamiltonians, such as chemical systems with millions of interacting terms, beyond the reach of exact diagonalization methods.

The SQD tool can target Hamiltonians expressed as linear combinations of Pauli operators, or second-quantized fermionic operators. The input samples are obtained by quantum circuits defined by the user, which are believed to be good representations of eigenstates (for example the ground state) of a target operator. The convergence rate of SQD as a function of the number of samples improves with the sparseness of the target eigenstate.

> ## Install SQD package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Install the SQD package
```

> There are two ways to install the SQD package. Via PyPI and building from source. We also recommend installing these packages in a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3.10/tutorial/venv.html) to ensure separation between package dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two ways to install the SQD package: PyPI and building from source. It is recommended to install these packages in a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3.10/tutorial/venv.html) to ensure separation between package dependencies.
```

Reviewer 2: (avoiding the "we")

### Install from PyPI

The most straightforward way to install the `qiskit-addon-sqd` package is via PyPI.

```bash
pip install qiskit-addon-sqd
```

### Build from source

> Users who wish to contribute to this package or who want to install it manually may do so by first cloning the repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users who wish to contribute to this package or who want to install it manually can do so by first cloning the repository:
```

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-sqd.git
```

> and install the package via `pip`. The repository also contains example notebooks which can be run and if you plan on developing in the repository, you may want to also install the `dev` dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and install the package via `pip`. The repository also contains example notebooks that you can run. If you plan on developing in the repository, you can install the `dev` dependencies.
```

Adjust the options to suit your needs.

```bash
pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies, dev]'
```

## Theoretical background

> The SQD workflow using self-consistent configuration recovery is explained in detail in [[1]](#references). This section will briefly overview the technique depicted in the following diagram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SQD workflow using self-consistent configuration recovery is explained in detail in [[1]](#references). This section provides an overview to the technique depicted in the following diagram.
```

![SQD diagram depicting configuration recovery, collecting subsamples, and obtaining eigenstates from those subsamples](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/sqd_diagram.png)

> Here $\bar{\mathcal{X}}$ is a set of noisy samples obtained from a QPU which contain, in the context of the Hamiltonian being simulated, physical and non-physical configurations (represented as bitstrings) obtained from execution on a QPU. The non-physical configurations are due to noise and can be processed by the `sqd.configuration_recovery.recover_configurations()` method to refine the samples into a new set $\mathcal{X}_R$. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here $\bar{\mathcal{X}}$ is a set of noisy samples which contain, in the context of the Hamiltonian being simulated, physical and non-physical configurations (represented as bitstrings) obtained from execution on a QPU. The non-physical configurations are due to noise and can be processed by the `sqd.configuration_recovery.recover_configurations()` method to refine the samples into a new set $\mathcal{X}_R$. 
```
Redundant, I think, unless I'm misunderstanding the sentence?

From this set, batches of configurations $\mathcal{S}^{(1)}...\ \mathcal{S}^{(K)}$ are collected and represent samples obtained from different subspaces of the Hamiltonian. These subspace samples are built from a set of basis states, $\mathcal{S}^{(k)}=\{|\mathbf{x}^{(k)}\rangle\}$, and are projections of the system Hamiltonian, $\hat{H}$. This projection is defined as

> $$ \hat{H}_{S^{(k)}} = \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\hat{H}\hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\text{, with } \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}} = \sum_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathcal{S}^{(k)}} |\mathbf{x}\rangle\langle\mathbf{x}|$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$$ \hat{H}_{S^{(k)}} = \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\hat{H}\hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\text{, with } \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}} = \sum_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathcal{S}^{(k)}} |\mathbf{x}\rangle\langle\mathbf{x}|,$$
```

where $\hat{H}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}$ is the Hamiltonian of a given subspace.

> The bulk of the SQD workflow lies here where each of these subspace Hamiltonians are diagonalized. The ground states obtained from each of these subspaces, $|\psi^{(k)}\rangle$, are used to obtain an estimate of a reference vector of occupancies $\mathbf{n}^{(K)}$ averaged over each of the $K$ subspaces and sent back to the configuration recovery step. Then a new set of subspaces are obtained and diagonalized, and this procedure iterates in a self-consistent loop until the ground state energy estimate has converged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bulk of the SQD workflow lies here wherein each of these subspace Hamiltonians is diagonalized. The ground states obtained from each of these subspaces, $|\psi^{(k)}\rangle$, are used to obtain an estimate of a reference vector of occupancies $\mathbf{n}^{(K)}$ averaged over each of the $K$ subspaces and sent back to the configuration recovery step. A new set of subspaces are then obtained and diagonalized, and this procedure iterates in a self-consistent loop until the ground state energy estimate has converged.
```

## Next steps

<Admonition type="tip" title="Recommendations">

>     - Read about basis gates in the [Represent quantum computers](./represent-quantum-computers#basis-gates) topic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Read about basis gates in the [Represent quantum computers](/guides/represent-quantum-computers#basis-gates) topic.
```
Eric is getting us in the habit of using /guides/ explicitly instead of a relative path

>     - Apply your knowledge of basis gates to one of these [workflow example tutorials.](https://learning.quantum.ibm.com/catalog/tutorials?category=workflow-example)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Apply your knowledge of basis gates to a tutorial in [IBM Quantum Learning](https://learning.quantum.ibm.com/catalog/tutorials).
```
Learning no longer has the workflow examples sorting option :(

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Qiskit/qiskit-addon-sqd.git
```

and install the package via `pip`. The repository also contains example notebooks that you can run. If you plan on developing in the repository, you can install the `dev` dependencies.

Adjust the options to suit your needs.

```bash
pip install tox notebook -e '.[notebook-dependencies, dev]'
```
</details>

## Theoretical background

The SQD workflow using self-consistent configuration recovery is explained in detail in [[1]](#references). This section provides an overview to the technique depicted in the following diagram.

![SQD diagram depicting configuration recovery, collecting subsamples, and obtaining eigenstates from those subsamples](/images/guides/qiskit-addons/sqd_diagram.png)

Here $\bar{\mathcal{X}}$ is a set of noisy samples which contain, in the context of the Hamiltonian being simulated, physical and non-physical configurations (represented as bitstrings) obtained from execution on a QPU. The non-physical configurations are due to noise and can be processed by the `sqd.configuration_recovery.recover_configurations()` method to refine the samples into a new set $\mathcal{X}_R$. 

> From this set, batches of configurations $\mathcal{S}^{(1)}...\ \mathcal{S}^{(K)}$ are collected and represent samples obtained from different subspaces of the Hamiltonian. These subspace samples are built from a set of basis states, $\mathcal{S}^{(k)}=\{|\mathbf{x}^{(k)}\rangle\}$, and are projections of the system Hamiltonian, $\hat{H}$. This projection is defined as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From this set, batches of configurations $\mathcal{S}^{(1)}...\ \mathcal{S}^{(K)}$ are collected according to a distribution proportional to the empirical frequencies of each $\mathbf{x}$  in $\mathcal{X}_R$. Each batch of sampled configurations spans a subspace, $\mathcal{S}^{(K)}$, in which the Hamiltonian is projected and diagonalized:
```

Reviewer 3: We want to say that the Hamiltonian is projected onto the subspaces, rather than the subspaces are projections of the Hamiltonian.

I pulled this language straight from the paper, and I think it fits nicely here

---
title: Sample-based quantum diagonalization
description: Overview of the Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) workflow
---

# Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) overview

Sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) is a classical **post-processing** technique which acts on samples obtained from a quantum circuit after execution on a QPU. It is useful for finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors of quantum operators, such as the Hamiltonian of a quantum system, and uses quantum and distributed classical computing together. This post-processing technique may be especially useful for users simulating chemical or other quantum systems.

Classical computing is used to process samples obtained from a quantum processor, and to project and diagonalize a target Hamiltonian in a subspace spanned by them. This allows SQD to be robust to samples corrupted by quantum noise and manage large Hamiltonians, such as chemical systems with millions of interacting terms, beyond the reach of exact diagonalization methods.

> The SQD tool can target Hamiltonians expressed as linear combinations of Pauli operators, or second-quantized fermionic operators. The input samples are obtained by quantum circuits defined by the user, which are believed to be good representations of eigenstates (for example, the ground state) of a target operator. The convergence rate of SQD as a function of the number of samples improves with the sparseness of the target eigenstate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SQD tool can target Hamiltonians expressed as linear combinations of Pauli operators or second-quantized Fermionic operators. The input samples are obtained by quantum circuits defined by the user, which are believed to be good representations of eigenstates (for example, the ground state) of a target operator. The convergence rate of SQD as a function of the number of samples improves with the sparseness of the target eigenstate.
```

Here $\bar{\mathcal{X}}$ is a set of noisy samples which contain, in the context of the Hamiltonian being simulated, physical and non-physical configurations (represented as bitstrings) obtained from execution on a QPU. The non-physical configurations are due to noise and can be processed by the `sqd.configuration_recovery.recover_configurations()` method to refine the samples into a new set $\mathcal{X}_R$. 

From this set, batches of configurations $\mathcal{S}^{(1)}...\ \mathcal{S}^{(K)}$ are collected and represent samples obtained from different subspaces of the Hamiltonian. These subspace samples are built from a set of basis states, $\mathcal{S}^{(k)}=\{|\mathbf{x}^{(k)}\rangle\}$, and are projections of the system Hamiltonian, $\hat{H}$. This projection is defined as

$$ \hat{H}_{S^{(k)}} = \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\hat{H}\hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}\text{, with } \hat{P}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}} = \sum_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathcal{S}^{(k)}} |\mathbf{x}\rangle\langle\mathbf{x}|,$$

where $\hat{H}_{\mathcal{S}^{(k)}}$ is the Hamiltonian of a given subspace.

> The bulk of the SQD workflow lies here wherein each of these subspace Hamiltonians is diagonalized. The ground states obtained from each of these subspaces, $|\psi^{(k)}\rangle$, are used to obtain an estimate of a reference vector of occupancies $\mathbf{n}^{(K)}$ averaged over each of the $K$ subspaces and sent back to the configuration recovery step. A new set of subspaces are then obtained and diagonalized, and this procedure iterates in a self-consistent loop until the ground state energy estimate has converged.

Reviewer 3: Regarding last half of last sentence:

The user controls how long to iterate -- there isn't any built-in mechanism that stops the algo upon convergence.

Author: Done o7

## Next steps

> <Admonition type="tip" title="Recommendations">

Reviewer 3: I'm not exactly sure how this will render (is it just some tiny link at the bottom of the page?), but these next steps don't seem to be particularly natural next steps

Reviewer 4: You can check out a preview of the docs at https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2148/. Every PR from someone with write access has a link preview like this - scroll up in the PR history to see it

<img width="1023" alt="Screenshot 2024-11-07 at 2 01 19 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/594dad57-cef7-4b3b-a348-7f1488c770d5">

Author: Yeah thanks for pointing that out. I think I had copied it from a different page b/c we usually want to have a "Next Steps" box, but hadn't updated it to be relevant to SQD
